review_DIHCL (#94)
creatis-myriad/creatis-myriad.github.io: collections/_posts/2022-11-28-CurriculumLearningByDIH.md

pdf: "https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.5555/3495724.3496445"
---

# Notes

* Code is available [here](https://github.com/tianyizhou/DIHCL)

# Highlights

* This paper proposes a new difficulty metric for curriculum learning called Dynamic Instantaneous Hardness (DIH).
* Its purpose is to learn faster and improve the results.
* It is only tested on classification but might be extended to other applications.
&nbsp;

# Introduction

Curriculum learning[^1] consists in presenting the right examples in the right order at the right time during training to enhance the learning process as teachers would do with their students. For that some hardness is defined, it can be related to the different classes -considering classification- or inherant to the examples like particular cases of shapes. One way is to use intantaneous feedback and at each epoch exemples are selected given this feedback, this is called self-paced learning[^2]. However it does not take into account the training history of each sample. It is why DIH is introduced.

# Methods

## Dynamic Instantaneous Hardness

> The goal of the measure is to get the utility of each sample in the future in order to select them wisely. The Dynamic Instantaneous Hardness (DIH) is defined as the exponential moving average of an instantaneous hardness measure of a sample over time, the instantaneous hardness $$a_t(i)$$ being a measure retrieved from the epoch that have just being computed.

Author: I picked the term from the paper but i guess it is not THE term chosen by the community, i changed it.

$$
r_{t+1}(i) = \left\{
  \begin{array}
    1 \gamma*a_t(i) + (1-\gamma)*r_{t}(i) \quad if \quad i \in S_t \\
    r_t(i) \quad else
  \end{array}
  \right.
$$

$$ \gamma \in [0,1] $$ is a discount factor and $$S_t$$ is the set of samples used for training at time $$t$$.

 Three instantaneous hardness are used :
* the loss : $$l(y_i,F(x_i; w_t))$$, where $$l(·, ·)$$ is a standard loss function and $$F(·; w)$$ is the model where $$w$$ are the model parameters
* the loss change between two consecutive time steps : $$ \|l(y_i,F(x_i; w_t))-l(y_i,F(x_i; w_{t-1}))\| $$
* the prediction flip (the 0-1 indicator of whether the prediction correctness changes) between two consecutive time steps : $$ \| \mathbb{1} [ŷ^t_i = y_i]-\mathbb{1}[ŷ^{t-1}_i = y_i]\| $$, where $$ŷ^t_i$$ is the prediction of sample $$i$$ in step $$t$$, e.g., $$ argmax_j F(x_i; w_t)[j]$$ for classification.

![](/collections/images/CL_DIH/DIH_vs_SPL.jpg)

Compared to DIH instantaneous hardness is very less stable so as the training and it requires extra inference steps of a model over all the samples.

## Properties

> DIH can vary a lot between different samples allowing their selection. When it is smaller, the samples are more memorable i.e. easy to learn while larger DIH means that it is harder to retain.

Author: I tried to reformulate to  make it more clear.

> DIH can vary a lot between different samples allowing their selection. When it is smaller, the samples are more memorable i.e. easy to learn while larger DIH means that it is harder to retain.

Reviewer: It is indeed much clearer, thanks :slightly_smiling_face:

![](/collections/images/CL_DIH/sample_separation.jpg)

> The curve shape is explained by a cyclic learning rate. We clearly see the gap between the training dynamics of red samples that are harder and blue samples that have smaller DIH. Moreover, the variance of sample with larger DIH is bigger showing that a local minima is not found for them and it is necessary to revisit them often, same conclusion regarding the prediction flip that is higher.

Author: Comments were taken into account and reformulated the end that didn't seem well regarding how you turned it.

![](/collections/images/CL_DIH/early_information.jpg)

DIH in early epochs (40) suffices to identify the easy vs. the hard samples. It doesn't require a whole training to classify the samples. 
DIH metrics decrease during training for both easy and hard samples indicating that as learning continues, samples become less informative, so that fewer samples can be selected for training.

# Experiments

## Curriculum learning

As the DIH represents the hardness of samples it seems natural to base some curriculum learning on it (DIHCL). They keep training the model on samples whith large DIH that have historically been hard since the model does not perform well on them and revisit easy samples less frequently because the model is more likely to stay at those samples’ minima. 
At each training step a subset of samples is selected according to their DIH values, given the probability $$p_{t,i} \propto h(r_{t-1}(i))$$ where $$h(·)$$ is a monotone non-decreasing function. 

> * DIHCL-Rand: data is sample proportionnaly to DIH $$h(r_t(i)) = r_t(i)$$
> * DIHCL-Exp: trade-off exploration/exploitation based on softmax value $$h(r_t(i)) = exp [\sqrt{2*log(n/n)}*r_t(i)], a_t(i) \leftarrow a_t(i)/p_{t,i} \forall i \in S_t$$
> * DIHCL-Beta: Beta prior distribution to balance exploration and exploitation $$h(r_t(i)) \leftarrow Beta(r_t(i),c-r_t(i))$$ with $$c > r_t(i)$$

Reviewer: I would suggest making the function names bold to make them stand out a bit more.

Formatting + typo:
```suggestion
* **DIHCL-Rand**: data is sampled proportionally to DIH $$h(r_t(i)) = r_t(i)$$
* **DIHCL-Exp**: trade-off between exploration/exploitation based on softmax value $$h(r_t(i)) = exp [\sqrt{2*log(n/n)}*r_t(i)], a_t(i) \leftarrow a_t(i)/p_{t,i} \forall i \in S_t$$
* **DIHCL-Beta**: Beta prior distribution to balance exploration and exploitation $$h(r_t(i)) \leftarrow Beta(r_t(i),c-r_t(i))$$ with $$c > r_t(i)$$
```

> The DIH of selected samples is updated with their instantaneous hardness normalized by the learning rate as it varies during training. During the first few epochs the whole dataset is used to set a correct DIH to each samples and then starts to select training samples, the subset size gradually deacrease during training (empirical study made to have optimal parameters).

Reviewer: Phrasing + punctuation + typo:
```suggestion
The DIH of selected samples is updated with their instantaneous hardness normalized by the learning rate as it varies during training. During the first few epochs, the whole dataset is used to set a correct DIH for each samples. Once the training starts to select samples, the subset size is gradually decreased during training (empirical study made to find optimal parameters).
```

Comparison is made with random baseline, SPL (based on instantaneous hardness) and MCL (Minmax curriculum learning[^3]).

## Results

![](/collections/images/CL_DIH/accuracy_table.jpg)

Better accuracy with DIHCL.

![](/collections/images/CL_DIH/accuracy_curves.jpg)

> DIHCL is more stable and reach its best performance sooner than SPL and MCL.

Reviewer: Conjugation:
```suggestion
DIHCL is more stable and reaches its best performance sooner than SPL and MCL.
```

![](/collections/images/CL_DIH/training_time.jpg)

Training time reduced with DIHCL.

## Ablation studies

![](/collections/images/CL_DIH/ablation_study.jpg)

> More experiments are presented in the appendix of the article to explain the decisions on the parameters. The more important settings concerns the discount factor $$\gamma$$ to calculate the DIH, the number of warm starting epochs and the cosine for the cyclic learning rate.

Reviewer: Phrasing + words:
```suggestion
More experiments are presented in the appendix of the article to explain the choice of parameters. The most important settings concern i) the discount factor $$\gamma$$ to calculate the DIH, ii) the number of warm starting epochs and iii) the cosine for the cyclic learning rate.
```

# Conclusions

> The article introduces a new metric to implement curriculum learning that is doubly effective as it reduces the training time and does not weed a previous training to be set. It wound be intersting to compare the performances to other types of CL and not only SPL and MCL like teacher-student CL that is another great CL technique.

Reviewer: Since DIH improves over current methods, I would say _benefic_ rather _effective_ + typos:
```suggestion
The article introduces a new metric to implement curriculum learning that is doubly benefic as it reduces the training time and does not need a previous training to be set. It would be interesting to compare the performance of DIH to other SOTA CL methods, such as teacher-student CL, aside from SPL and MCL.
```

# References

[^1]: Y. Bengio et al. Curriculum learning. Journal of the American Podiatry Association 60(1):6. January 2009. DOI:10.1145/1553374.1553380
[^2]: M. Kumar et al. Self-Paced Learning for Latent Variable Models. Procedings of the 23rd conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. 2010. DOI:10.5555/2997189.2997322

> [^3]: T. Zhou and J. Bilmes. Minimax curriculum learning: Machine teaching with desirable difficulties and scheduled diversity. In ICLR. February 2018.

Reviewer: It would be great if you could format these references as hyperlinks directly to the papers :wink:

---
layout: review

> title: "Curriculum learning by Dynamic Instantaneous Hardness"

Reviewer: Just noticed capitalization:
```suggestion
title: "Curriculum Learning by Dynamic Instantaneous Hardness"
```

Three definitions of instantaneous hardness are compared:
* the loss : $$l(y_i,F(x_i; w_t))$$, where $$l(·, ·)$$ is a standard loss function and $$F(·; w)$$ is the model where $$w$$ are the model parameters
* the loss change between two consecutive time steps : $$ \|l(y_i,F(x_i; w_t))-l(y_i,F(x_i; w_{t-1}))\| $$
* the prediction flip (the 0-1 indicator of whether the prediction correctness changes) between two consecutive time steps : $$ \| 𝟙[\hat{y}^t_i = y_i]- 𝟙[\hat{y}^{t-1}_i = y_i]\| $$, where $$\hat{y}^t_i$$ is the prediction of sample $$i$$ in step $$t$$, e.g., $$ \arg\max_j F(x_i; w_t)[j]$$ for classification.

![](/collections/images/CL_DIH/DIH_vs_SPL.jpg)

Compared to DIH, instantaneous hardness is i) much less stable during training and ii) requires extra training and inference steps by a model over all the samples.

## Properties

DIH can vary a lot between different samples, helping to discriminate between them to select the most informative samples. When it is smaller, the samples are more memorable, i.e. easy to learn, while a larger DIH means that the samples are harder to retain.

![](/collections/images/CL_DIH/sample_separation.jpg)

> The large steps in the curves are explained by a cyclic learning rate. We clearly see the gap between the training dynamics of red samples that are harder and blue samples that have smaller DIH. Moreover, the variance of loss of samples with larger DIH is bigger showing that a local minima is not found for them. It is thus necessary to revisit them often. The prediction flip leads to the same conclusion: it is higher for the same samples that are necesarry to revisit.

Reviewer: Minor rephrasing to make the sentence simpler + typo:
```suggestion
The large steps in the curves are explained by a cyclic learning rate. We clearly see the gap between the training dynamics of red samples that are harder and blue samples that have smaller DIH. Moreover, the variance of loss of samples with larger DIH is bigger showing that a local minima is not found for them. It is thus necessary to revisit them often. The prediction flip leads to the same conclusion; it is higher for the samples that need to be revisited.
```

# Methods

## Dynamic Instantaneous Hardness

The goal of the measure is to get the usefulness of each sample in the future in order to select them wisely. The Dynamic Instantaneous Hardness (DIH) is defined as the exponential moving average of instantaneous hardness measures of a sample over time, the instantaneous hardness $$a_t(i)$$ being a measure retrieved from the epoch that has just been computed.

$$
r_{t+1}(i) = \left\{
  \begin{array}
    1 \gamma*a_t(i) + (1-\gamma)*r_{t}(i) \quad if \quad i \in S_t \\
    r_t(i) \quad else
  \end{array}
  \right.
$$

$$ \gamma \in [0,1] $$ is a discount factor and $$S_t$$ is the set of samples used for training at time $$t$$.

> The three instantaneous hardness used to calculate DIH and compared are:

Reviewer: Now that what you mean is clear, I'd suggest to reformulate it more succintly as:
```suggestion
Three definitions of instantaneous hardness are compared:
```

* the loss : $$l(y_i,F(x_i; w_t))$$, where $$l(·, ·)$$ is a standard loss function and $$F(·; w)$$ is the model where $$w$$ are the model parameters
* the loss change between two consecutive time steps : $$ \|l(y_i,F(x_i; w_t))-l(y_i,F(x_i; w_{t-1}))\| $$
* the prediction flip (the 0-1 indicator of whether the prediction correctness changes) between two consecutive time steps : $$ \| 𝟙[\hat{y}^t_i = y_i]- 𝟙[\hat{y}^{t-1}_i = y_i]\| $$, where $$\hat{y}^t_i$$ is the prediction of sample $$i$$ in step $$t$$, e.g., $$ \arg\max_j F(x_i; w_t)[j]$$ for classification.

![](/collections/images/CL_DIH/DIH_vs_SPL.jpg)

Compared to DIH, instantaneous hardness is i) much less stable during training and ii) requires extra training and inference steps by a model over all the samples.

## Properties

> DIH can vary a lot between different samples facilitating their discrimination, and so helping to select the most informative samples. When it is smaller, the samples are more memorable, i.e. easy to learn, while a larger DIH means that the samples are harder to retain.

Reviewer: Just a slight suggestion on how to restructure the sentence so that it flows better :wink: 
```suggestion
DIH can vary a lot between different samples, helping to discriminate between them to select the most informative samples. When it is smaller, the samples are more memorable, i.e. easy to learn, while a larger DIH means that the samples are harder to retain.
```

![](/collections/images/CL_DIH/sample_separation.jpg)

> The the large steps in the curves are explained by a cyclic learning rate. We clearly see the gap between the training dynamics of red samples that are harder and blue samples that have smaller DIH. Moreover, the variance of samples with larger DIH is bigger showing that a local minima is not found for them. It is thus necessary to revisit them often, and the same conclusion can be made regarding the prediction flip that is higher for the same samples.

Reviewer: Repeated word + the last sentence is still confusing.
> the same conclusion can be made regarding the prediction flip that is higher for the same samples

does not really make sense. Do you mean to say that the prediction flip is just as useful as the DIH to help discriminate which samples to revisit? In that case, _regarding_ is not the right word because it's not indicating is a justification for why the same conclusion can be made.
```suggestion
The large steps in the curves are explained by a cyclic learning rate. We clearly see the gap between the training dynamics of red samples that are harder and blue samples that have smaller DIH. Moreover, the variance of samples with larger DIH is bigger showing that a local minima is not found for them. It is thus necessary to revisit them often, and the same conclusion can be made regarding the prediction flip that is higher for the same samples.
```

Author: Yes that's almost it: i want to say that the prediction flip, as the loss variance, is showing that the samples with large DIH are those that we we need to revisit. I changed the order of the sentence, trying to make it more clear

Reviewer: Okay, I think I finally get it with the last version! Thanks for your patience with the numerous edits :slightly_smiling_face:

![](/collections/images/CL_DIH/early_information.jpg)

DIH in early epochs (40) suffices to differentiate between easy and hard samples. It doesn't require a full training to classify the samples. 
DIH metrics decrease during training for both easy and hard samples, indicating that as learning progresses samples become less informative, and resulting in fewer samples being needed to continue training the model.

# Experiments

## Curriculum learning

> Since the DIH represents the hardness of samples ,it seems natural to base some curriculum learning on it (DIHCL). The authors keep training the model on samples whith large DIH that have historically been hard, since the model does not perform well on them, and revisit easy samples less frequently, because the model is more likely to stay at those samples’ minima. 

Reviewer: Misplaced comma:
```suggestion
Since the DIH represents the hardness of samples, it seems natural to base some curriculum learning on it (DIHCL). The authors keep training the model on samples whith large DIH that have historically been hard, since the model does not perform well on them, and revisit easy samples less frequently, because the model is more likely to stay at those samples’ minima. 
```

# Conclusions

The article introduces a new metric to implement curriculum learning that is doubly benefic as it reduces the training time and does not need a previous training to be set. It would be interesting to compare the performance of DIH to other SOTA CL methods, such as teacher-student CL, aside from SPL and MCL.

# References

[^1]: Y. Bengio et al. [Curriculum learning](https://ronan.collobert.com/pub/matos/2009_curriculum_icml.pdf). Journal of the American Podiatry Association 60(1):6. January 2009.
[^2]: M. Kumar et al. [Self-Paced Learning for Latent Variable Models](https://papers.nips.cc/paper/2010/file/e57c6b956a6521b28495f2886ca0977a-Paper.pdf). Procedings of the 23rd conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. 2010.
[^3]: T. Zhou and J. Bilmes. [Minimax curriculum learning: Machine teaching with desirable difficulties and scheduled diversity](https://openreview.net/pdf?id=BywyFQlAW). In ICLR. February 2018.

> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 

Reviewer: We can get rid of all these empty lines at the end :wink: 
```suggestion
```
